API to correlate system time with external time sources (#28977)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/reference/misc/timeutil.rst

.. _timeutil_api:

Time Utilities
##############

Overview
********

:ref:`kernel_timing_uptime` in Zephyr is based on the a tick counter.  With
the default :option:`CONFIG_TICKLESS_KERNEL` this counter advances at a
nominally constant rate from zero at the instant the system started. The POSIX
equivalent to this counter is something like ``CLOCK_MONOTONIC`` or, in Linux,
``CLOCK_MONOTONIC_RAW``.  :c:func:`k_uptime_get()` provides a millisecond
representation of this time.

Applications often need to correlate the Zephyr internal time with external

> time scales scales used in daily life, such as local time or Coordinated

Author: Typo; fixed now.

=============================

Time scale instants can be represented in multiple ways including:

* Seconds since an epoch. POSIX representations of time in this form
  include ``time_t`` and ``struct timespec``, which are generally
  interpreted as a representation of "UNIX Time" (`RFC 8536
  <timeutil-RFC8537s2>`_).

* Calendar time as a year, month, day, hour, minutes, and seconds
  relative to an epoch. POSIX representations of time in this form include
  ``struct tm``.

Keep in mind that these are simply time representations that must be
interpreted relative to a time scale which may be local time, UTC, or
some other continuous or discontinuous scale.

Some necessary transformations are available in standard C library
routines. For example, ``time_t`` measuring seconds since the POSIX
EPOCH is converted to ``struct tm`` representing calendar time with
`gmtime()
<https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/gmtime.html>`__.
Sub-second timestamps like ``struct timespec`` can also use this to
produce the calendar time representation and deal with sub-second
offsets separately.

The inverse transformation is not standardized: APIs like ``mktime()``

> expect information about time zones.  Zephyr module provides this

Reviewer: Which zephyr module?

Synchronization or alignment between time scales is done with a
multi-step process:

* An instant in a time scale is represented by an (unsigned) 64-bit
  integer, assumed to advance at a fixed nominal rate.
* :c:struct:`timeutil_sync_config` records the nominal rates of a
  reference time scale/source (e.g. TAI) and a local time source
  (e.g. :c:func:`k_uptime_ticks`).
* :c:struct:`timeutil_sync_instant` records the representation of a
  single instant in both the reference and local time scales.
* :c:struct:`timeutil_sync_state` provides storage for an initial
  instant, a recently received second observation, and a skew that can
  adjust for relative errors in the actual rate of each time scale.
* :c:func:`timeutil_sync_ref_from_local()` and
  :c:func:`timeutil_sync_local_from_ref()` convert instants in one time
  scale to another taking into account skew that can be estimated from
  the two instances stored in the state structure by
  :c:func:`timeutil_sync_estimate_skew`.

.. doxygengroup:: timeutil_sync_apis
   :project: Zephyr

.. _timeutil_realtime:

System Time Conversion
======================

The :option:`CONFIG_TIMEUTIL_REALTIME` flag enables API that allows

> zephyr to provide the current civil ("real") time that advances aligned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
zephyr to provide the current civil ("wall clock") time that advances aligned
```

to :ref:`kernel_timing_uptime`.

Something in the application must invoke
:c:func:`timeutil_realtime_set()` at least once with a reference

> timestamp and the :c:func:`k_uptime_ticks()` value corresponding to the

Reviewer 2: So essentially the 'seed' is created at the time `timeutil_realtime_set()` is called. Is there any additional information on when/where this should be called for optimal use of the API (I can imagine, the earlier the better).

reference timestmap.  At that point :c:func:`timeutil_realtime_get()`
will provide the current time to the resolution of the tick counter
assuming that the reference and local time instants were precise and
that the local clock is accurate.

Applications that require precise time should use the other functions in

> this API to provide additional pairs of reference and local time,

Reviewer 2: So more than one external reference is possible? Or is this is just a 'trick' by doing the same actions multiple times with multiple external references? How would the differences between these transformations (/external source time) be handled?

alignment to changes in Earth’s rotation. Thus the difference between
TAI and UT varies over time. There are several variants of UT, with `UTC
<timeutil-UTC>`_ being the most common.

UT times are independent of location. UT is the basis for Standard Time
(or "local time") which is the time at a particular location. Standard
time has a fixed offset from UT at any given instant, primarily
influenced by longitude, but the offset may be adjusted ("daylight
saving time") to align standard time to the local solar time. In a sense
local time is "more discontinuous" than UT.

`POSIX Time <timeutil-RFC8536s2>`_ is a time scale that counts seconds since
the "POSIX epoch" at 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z (i.e. the start of 1970
UTC). `UNIX Time <timeutil-RFC8536s2>`_ is an extension of POSIX time using
negative values to represent times before the POSIX epoch. Both of these
scales assume that every day has exactly 86400 seconds. In normal use
instants in these scales correspond to times in the UTC scale, so they
inherit the discontinuity.

The continuous analogue is `UNIX Leap Time <timeutil-RFC8536s2>`_ which
is UNIX time plus all leap-second corrections added after the POSIX

> epoch (when TAI-UTC was 8 s).

Reviewer: I don't understand the "when TAI-UTY was 8 s" comment?

Author: The Julian date for 1970-01-01 is [2440587.50000](https://www.aavso.org/cgi-bin/cal2jd.pl).

The [formula for TAI-UTC in effect](https://www.iers.org/IERS/EN/Science/Recommendations/resolutionB1.html) on that date is:

    TAI-UTC=   4.2131700 S + (MJD - 39126.) X 0.002592 S

where MJD = JD - 2400000.5.  This evaluates to 8.000082.

1970-01-01T00:00:00Z 0          1970-01-01T00:00:08 +8      0
1999-12-31T23:59:28Z 946684768  2000-01-01T00:00:00 +32     946684792
1999-12-31T23:59:59Z 946684799  2000-01-01T00:00:31 +32     946684823
2000-01-01T00:00:00Z 946684800  2000-01-01T00:00:32 +32     946684824
2016-12-31T23:59:59Z 1483228799 2017-01-01T00:00:35 +36     1483228827
2016-12-31T23:59:60Z undefined  2017-01-01T00:00:36 +36     1483228828
2017-01-01T00:00:00Z 1483228800 2017-01-01T00:00:37 +37     1483228829
==================== ========== =================== ======= ==============

Functional Requirements
-----------------------

The Zephyr tick counter has no concept of leap seconds or standard time
offsets and is a continuous time scale. However it can be relatively
inaccurate, with drifts as much as three minutes per hour (assuming an
RC timer with 5% tolerance).

There are two stages required to support conversion between Zephyr time
and common human time scales:

* Translation between the continuous but inaccurate Zephyr time scale
  and an accurate external stable time scale;
* Translation between the stable time scale and the (possibly

>   discontinuous) civil time scale.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean that the civil time scale would be non-monotonic? That's how I interpreted your definition of the term, that you described [[here](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/issues/30590#issuecomment-744427593)]. 
Also, the stable time scale would/should be continuous(/monotonic) then?

>   discontinuous) civil time scale.

Author: monotonic is well-defined: each value observed is no less than the previous value.

continuous follows the math definition: no abrupt changes in value.  For time it's generally saying it's linear.

TAI is a timescale that is monotonic and continuous.  Each time mark (representation of an instant) is totally ordered and maps one-to-one to an instant in time.

UTC is a timescale that is monotonic and discontinuous.  Each time mark is totally ordered and increasing, but some may be skipped, e.g. 2021-12-31T23:59:59 would not exist if a negative leap second applied at the end of this year.  (Or 2021-12-31T23:59:59 might be followed by 2021-12-31T23:59:60 before 2022-01-01T00:00:00 if there was a positive leap second.)

European Summer Time and other daylight-aware time scales are civil timescales that are not monotonic, and therefore discontinuous.  "civil" because it's a time scale legally defined by civil authorities, like local governments.  Not monotonic because time goes backward by 1 hour in fall, causing the same time mark to apply to two instants at a one hour interval.

So civil timescales can be non-monotonic, but the time scales used by this API must be monotonic and linear, so any any discontinuities must be addressed by external adjustments, just would be if somebody wanted time on a device to be in the local timezone-aware timescale.

>   discontinuous) civil time scale.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, that clarifies it a lot. If you think it would fit in the documentation, I think this information could be very useful in there as well.

The API around :c:func:`timeutil_sync_state_update()` supports the first
step of converting between continuous time scales.

> The second step requires external information including schedules of

Reviewer 2: So right now this API could still cause issues if the external time source wouldn't be monotonic (like most wallclock time sources, such as RTC, might not be)?

Reviewer 2: Is there a way that adding such functionality would allow support of a discontinuous time source?

Author: I don't believe it belongs in this API.  You'd use this API to get a timestamp in a continuous scale like TAI, then do adjustments using external tables and rules.

E.g. if local time is in TAI or GPS time (continuous monotonic), you'd need the leap second tables referenced elsewhere to figure out what the UTC offset is for that time.  Then you'd use the UTC time in conjunction with tables/rules for the local time zone to get the corresponding local time.  You can reverse that, with the problem that some local times are either ambiguous (1:30 am during a "fall back" adjustment) or non-existent (1:30 am during "spring forward").

If you're using this API with a UTC time source, which is fairly likely, you'd still need the leap second tables to deal with the discontinuity when a leap second occurred.  You can see that in the table up around like 215.

Reviewer 2: (Quick add-on: the RTC in STM32 SoCs can be non-monotonic, if the steps are taken to implement daylight saving time, and these instructions can also be memorized (by bit-setting). However, I believe right now that is not part of the configuration, so won't be a problem right now, if the RTC counter driver would be used)

I was asking the question because I was wondering if that would make it possible for us to still use the API, but since we discussed this above, that's solved. 

If you do end up doing the long-duration data collection runs after the API has been merged, please do share! (I guess it could also be useful for the potential switching clock source in Nordic, right? Since that would change the base instant and skew.)

leap seconds and local time offset changes. This may be best provided by
an external library, and is not currently part of the time utility APIs.

Selecting an External Source and Time Scale
-------------------------------------------

If an application requires civil time accuracy within several seconds
then UTC could be used as the stable time source. However, if the
external source adjusts to a leap second there will be a discontinuity:
the elapsed time between two observations taken at 1 Hz is not equal to
the numeric difference between their timestamps.

For precise activities a continuous scale that is independent of local
and solar adjustments simplifies things considerably. Suitable
continuous scales include:

-  GPS time: epoch of 1980-01-06T00:00:00Z, continuous following TAI
   with an offset of TAI-GPS=19 s.
-  Bluetooth mesh time: epoch of 2000-01-01T00:00:00Z, continuous
   following TAI with an offset of -32.
-  UNIX Leap Time: epoch of 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z, continuous following
   TAI with an offset of -8.

> 

Reviewer: I must have missed something in the text leading up to this, but I seek a clarification of those TAI offsets?

Author: They're the TAI-UTC offset in effect at the corresponding epoch.  For the first two they can be determined using the leap  second table; the UNIX epoch one is calculated as shown above.
